doc/migration: improve versioned migration workflow example (#2851)
ent/ent: doc/md/versioned-migrations.mdx

title: Versioned Migrations
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> If you are using the [Atlas](https://github.com/ariga/atlas) migration engine you are able to use the versioned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using the [Atlas](https://github.com/ariga/atlas) migration engine, you are able to user the versioned migration workflow.
```

> migrations feature of it. Instead of applying the computed changes directly to the database, it will generate a set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of applying the computed changes directly to the database, Atlas generates a set
```

of migration files containing the necessary SQL statements to migrate the database. These files can then be edited to

> your needs and be applied by any tool golang-migrate, Flyway, liquibase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
your needs and be applied by many existing migration tools, such as golang-migrate, Flyway, liquibase, etc.
```

> your needs and be applied by any tool golang-migrate, Flyway, liquibase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your needs and be applied by any migration tool, such as golang-migrate, Flyway, and Liquibase.
```

## Generating Versioned Migration Files

> As mentioned above, versioned migrations do only work, if the new [Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) based migration engine is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, versioned migrations only work if the new [Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) based migration engine is
```

used. Migration files are generated by computing the difference between two **states**. We call the state reflected by

> your Ent schema the **desired** state, and the last state before your most recent changes the **current** state. There

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your Ent schema the **desired** state, and the **current** state is the last state of your schema before your most recent changes. There
```

> two ways for Ent to determine the current state:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are two ways for Ent to determine the current state:
```

1. Replay the existing migration directory and inspect the schema (default)
2. Connect to an existing database and inspect the schema

> We emphasize to use the first option, as it has the advantage for you to not have to connect to a production database to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We emphasize to use the first option, as it has the advantage of not having to connect to a production database to
```

> create a diff. In addition, this approach also works, if you have multiple deployments in different migration states.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
create a diff. In addition, this approach also works if you have multiple deployments in different migration states.
```

![atlas-versioned-migration-process](https://entgo.io/images/assets/migrate-atlas-replay.png)

#### Enable the versioned migration feature flag

The first step is to enable the versioned migration feature by passing in the `sql/versioned-migration` feature flag.
Depending on how you execute the Ent code generator, you have to use one of the two options:

<Tabs
defaultValue="ent"
values={[

> {label: 'With Ent CLI', value: 'ent'},
> {label: 'With entc package', value: 'entc'},

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{label: 'Using the Ent CLI', value: 'ent'},
{label: 'Using the entc package', value: 'entc'},
```

func main() {
	err := entc.Generate("./schema", &gen.Config{

>         //highlight-next-line

Author: ```suggestion
		//highlight-next-line
```

>         //highlight-next-line

Reviewer 2: didnt know i could do this!

Author: https://github.com/ent/ent/blob/master/doc/website/docusaurus.config.js#L89-L91

;)

}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Create a migration files generator

After running code generation using `go generate`, the new methods for creating migration files were added to your
`ent/migrate` package. The next steps are:

1\. Provide a URL to an Atlas [dev database](https://atlasgo.io/concepts/dev-database) to replay the migration directory

> and compute the **current**  Let's use `docker` for creating an ephemeral database container:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and compute the **current**  Let's use `docker` for running a local database container:
```

> and compute the **current**  Let's use `docker` for creating an ephemeral database container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and compute the **current**  state. 
Let's use `docker` to create an ephemeral database container:
```

func main() {
	ctx := context.Background()
	// Create a local migration directory able to understand golang-migrate migration files for replay.
	dir, err := sqltool.NewGolangMigrateDir("ent/migrate/migrations")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("failed creating atlas migration directory: %v", err)
	}
	// Migrate diff options.
	opts := []schema.MigrateOption{
		schema.WithDir(dir),                         // provide migration directory
		schema.WithMigrationMode(schema.ModeReplay), // provide migration mode
		schema.WithDialect(dialect.MySQL),           // Ent dialect to use
	}
	if len(os.Args) != 2 {

> 		log.Fatalln("migration name is required. Use: 'go run -mod=mod ent/migrate/main.go <name>'")

Reviewer 2: should it be required?

Author: In this migration example yes. I think it makes sense.

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("failed generating migration file: %v", err)
	}
}
```

3\. Trigger migration generation by executing `go run -mod=mod ent/migrate/main.go <name>` from the root of the project.
For example:

```bash
go run -mod=mod ent/migrate/main.go create_users
```

Run `ls ent/migrate/migrations` after the command above was passed successfully, and you will notice Atlas created 3
files:

<Tabs
defaultValue="migration_file_up"
values={[
{label: '20220811114629_create_users.up.sql', value: 'migration_file_up'},
{label: '20220811114629_create_users.down.sql', value: 'migration_file_down'},
{label: 'atlas.sum', value: 'sum_file'},
]}>
<TabItem value="migration_file_up">

```sql
-- create "users" table
CREATE TABLE `users` (`id` bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT, PRIMARY KEY (`id`)) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin;
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="migration_file_down">

```sql
-- reverse: create "users" table
DROP TABLE `users`;
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sum_file">

In addition to the migration directory, Atlas maintains a file name `atlas.sum` which is used
to ensure the integrity of the migration directory and force developers to deal with situations

> where migration order or contents was modified after the fact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where migration order or contents were modified after the fact.
```

> Please be aware, that migration directory replay us currently only support for `golang-migrate/migrate` formatted files.

Reviewer 2: Is this sentence still true? 

If so:

```suggestion
Please be aware, that migration directory replay currently only supports `golang-migrate/migrate` formatted files.
```

Author: Yes.
